So welcome back and congratulations once again for making your first Android app in the last section
and I hope you're looking forward to learning about Java in more detail.
So Java is quite an old language created by Sun Microsystems now Oracle in 1995 but it's still very
much in active use today not only in Android applications but learning Java will allow you to make server
based applications as well as desktop applications for both Windows and Mac Minecraft for example was
written in Java as well as a number of business applications that are used very widely around the world.
So learning it not only will allow you to make Android apps but open up a number of different avenues
for you as well.
It's also what's known as an object oriented language which will allow you to learn that type of language
as well.
So it's a really worthwhile language to learn.
Now you'll notice here that I'm in my browser and not in Android studio and that's where we're going
to be spending the most of our time in this section mostly because every time I want to run a bit of
code and show you what it does I don't want to have to compile an Android app and wait for it to display
on the phone.
So I've chosen borow x y dot com.
So I go there on your computer now and you should see pretty much exactly this page if by any chance
this Web site isn't available by the time you're watching this course there are a number of other Java
compilers out there.
And indeed if you don't like the one that I've chose then feel free to just Google online Java compiler
and you'll find a bunch that you can use them.
They all do basically the same thing but I'll show you just a few reasons why I think this one is worth
using.
Firstly you've got the nice code view and output view which is what you're generally going to want when
you're doing some code but also you've got the ability to save and share your code.
So before we even write any applications let's register for the Web site.
So just fill in your details here.
I'm going to use rope rope Percival took her to U.K. put in Alias.
So this is what will appear on your account.
So I'll just call myself Sir Percival and then I'm going to use the last pass to generate a password.
Obviously you can just type one in there if you like.
Well except the terms and conditions and then enter the capture
OK.
There we go.
So I just need to confirm my email address.
You don't need to see me doing that so I've just done that and now I'm going to click continue.
And there we go.
So now I'm locked in.
And now I can save all my programs so that's going to be a really useful thing for you to be able to
do as you go along.
Each program you make you can save and then go back and view it and edit it later.
And useful for both of us is when you have any problems that you can't figure out then you can just
share your saved program by clicking get you l here.
So if I just put some text in there for example and then click get you Arel then I'm given a u r l which
I can share.
So if you want to post something in the forums then you can post it using that you r l and then we'll
all be able to see and run your code and try and tell you what's wrong.
So that's a really useful feature and that's why I've chosen to use this site to practice our Java.
All right but enough introduction.
Let's get straight in and create our Hello World app.
Now another handy feature of this Java editor is that we've got a number of kind of templates of code
that we can look at and just import straight away.
So I'm going to import.
Hello world.
There we go.
So let's just get rid of Untitled there.
Now some of these keywords and structures will be reasonably familiar to you as we use them in the last
section.
But now as I said previously we're going to look at them in much more detail.
So first of all let's just click Start up here to see what this does.
You might be able to guess.
It prints hello world to the console as you can kind of guess that line might achieve for you.
So what's going on here why is this set up like it is it's not just simple print to the console line.
We've got a load of other code as well.
So let's take it step by step.
So this first line here it creates a class called Hello world and that class is public.
We actually don't need that word public there.
If I get rid of that and then run it again everything works fine but it's conventional to put it in
and it just defines the access level of this class.
So the class can be accessed from any way in our app which doesn't really make much sense when we've
only got such a tiny page here.
But if you imagine you have a load of scripts and a load of different places in your app you might want
to keep some areas of it hidden from others essentially.
So what's a class you might be asking.
Well it's one of the things that will become much clearer as the course goes on.
But to give you a brief introduction a class is like a template what's known as an object.
So my usual way of explaining this is to think about in terms of computer games.
So let's say you've got a computer game that has some ghost characters in it.
What you might want to do with these guys characters is create a class called Ghost and then within
that class you have a load of code that defines a ghost.
So it might define how much it damages the character when the character comes into contact with the
ghost.
It might define how the ghost moves around the screen.
It might define an image that matches what the ghost looks like.
Essentially it's a template to create a ghost then later on in your code whenever you want to create
a ghost.
You can do that using this class and that's all we're doing really well.
Defining a type of object and that's the basis of object oriented programming which is what we're doing
when we work with Java.
So just to recap that a class is a template to create a certain type of object.
For example a character or a ghost in a computer game.
So what are we doing here then.
Well here we're really just creating a class because we have to do any java program has to start with
a class definition.
For example I try and remove that code and then run it the provided class name is invalid because there
isn't one essentially.
So I'm going to commands to get back to where we are.
You can use controls and of course to undo anything that you do in Windows as well.
So essentially that is what you need to start whenever you're making a Java program.
You need to define a class and call it whatever you like and then you have some curly brackets.
And that's where your code for that class is going to go.
OK.
So then we have a other bit of code which is this line here which is something that we've seen a little
of.
We haven't worked with this particular method.
So this is the main method and a method by the way is just a function by another name.
So when we're working in object oriented programming we talk about methods rather than functions and
they are just chunks of code that do something like display hello world for example.
So don't be afraid of the word method.
It just means a chunk of code that does something.
So every Java program again has to have a main method and essentially that method is what is going to
run when the java program is executed.
And we've got a few keywords here.
Two of which we're familiar with one we're not so public again just means that this main method is going
to be accessible from anywhere in our program.
Voit we've seen before means that the main method won't return anything.
So just to remind you you might have a function that doubles a number.
For some reason and that function will then return something.
If you send the number 4 to it it will return the number 8.
If your time and the number 10 it'll return the number 20.
But this method is not returning anything.
So we put voice to then and the new keyword that we haven't seen before is static and that's slightly
tricky to define So I'm just going to quickly go back to my ghost example.
So let's say we have our goes to class
so when I create a ghost.
That ghost is alive presumably.
But if it gets killed by the character then it will become dead.
So I might have a variable that says whether this ghost is alive or dead and that that variable would
be specific to each ghost that I create.
So that's not an instance.
So each instance of that goes to class whenever I create a ghost that will have its own property of
whether it's alive or dead.
But also I might have the damage rating of a ghost which might be the amount of life that the character
loses when it comes into contact with the ghost and I might want that to be fixed for all ghosts for
all time.
As long as this game is being run so if that was the case I would want that variable to be static so
that's what static means.
Essentially it's related to the ghost class rather than each instance of the ghost.
Each specific ghost.
So that makes sense if not if it didn't quite then go back and listen to it again or have a quick google
and just google what does static mean in Java.
That's another reason to learn Java.
By the way because it's a very well established language almost every question you could possibly imagine
has already been asked and answered on line probably several times.
So there's loads of information out there.
When you Google it.
So that's what our static keyword means here.
But really you don't need to fully understand what's going on there.
The main point is that every Java program needs a main method and that needs to be defined like this.
OK so now we're just looking at this part.
So this is the variables that are going to be passed to the main method and those in this case are an
array of strings.
Now don't worry too much about what an array is we're going to look at that in a few videos time.
But the name of the variable is called OGs and that can be changed.
We could change it to arguments would be fine and if we run that it would still work without any problems.
But the convention is to cool it.
And essentially the args are some particular values that you might want to set when you run the program.
So I might want to tell the program my name for example and I would send it the name Rob.
I might want to tell it my age Papin that you fool.
So that's not relevant to us at all as Android Developer it's not going to be manually setting OGs when
we run apps but it is part of Java.
So it's good to be aware of what it's doing.
All right.
We're nearly that so more or less understand what that line is doing now.
The basic summary is that this is the line that defines the method or chunk of code that runs when the
program itself is run.
And then this last line then is something completely new.
But it's fairly straightforward.
I hope so.
We're using a system function here.
And then we're out.
So we're outputting something.
So we use system dropped out and then print line and the line that we want to print is hello world which
we put in double quotes there and in parentheses as well.
And then every line in Java when have a curly bracket will have a semi-colon to show that that line
has been completed.
Right.
So it's fairly trivial of course to change that from Hello World.
Hello Rob.
Just change the code there.
Fantastic.
So that's our introduction how a Java program is laid out and what the basic lines are doing.
The challenge in this video is to essentially recreate this from scratch.
So stare at it and try and remember in as much detail as you can and then essentially just try and get
rid of the whole thing and rewrite it and make it a little bit interesting.
Put something else here rather than Hello World or a robot or whatever but basically just try and remember
this and write it out from scratch.
Preferably telling yourself what each keyword is doing as you're writing it.
Good luck.
All right.
I hope you manage that.
I'm just going to take this three from scratch quite quickly.
So our first step is to create a public class mostly because every Java app needs a class and that by
default the class is normally defined to be public so it's accessible anywhere within an app.
And this time I'm going to call this hi Rob just to change it up a little bit and then we'll have our
curly brackets to contain the code for that class.
And then we're going to define the method which is the chunk of code that's going to be run when the
app itself is run or the program is run.
And this is going to be public again so accessible from anywhere in the app is going to be static because
we want it to be related to the class rather than any specific instance of the class that doesn't really
make sense in this class because we're not actually creating any instances of it.
So don't really worry about what that's doing here.
The main thing is that we need to put the word static in when we define the main method and then void
because it doesn't return anything.
And then we're going to call the method main and the method is going to accept an array of strings like
that and that array of strings is going to be called Ogg's and that's it.
And then once again we have some curly brackets to contain inside code.
And then finally we want to write the code to display the words Hi Rob in the console.
And we do that by accessing the system functions system methods.
And we want the set of output methods within that so System darte out and then we want to print a line
say print L.N. and the line that we want to print is high up and we contain that in double quites and
we contain the double quotes in parentheses and then a semi-colon at the end of the line.
Fantastic.
So let's just run that and it works fine.
Brilliant.
So fairly straightforward.
All we're doing is rewriting what we saw before but hopefully that helped clarify in your mind what
each bit of this code is doing.
So I'm just going to say this program
I call it hello world.
OK.
And then you can see that if you do that as well it's saved there and then you can edit it and publish
it as well.
And in the next lecture you'll see a link to this code so you'll be able to view the code for each of
these lectures and run it and edit it and test it for yourself.
Now the only two of course because you will have written it out yourself anyway as part of the challenges
and as you're working your way through the videos.
Great.
So that's how.
Hello world Java program completed in the next video.
We'll see in more detail how to create and work with variables in Java.
So you're there.